Genitive Construction in Afaan Oromoo


By: 

Tolemariam Fufa Teso (PhD)
Department of Afaan Oromoo Language, Literature and Folklore
College of Humanities, Language Studies, Journalism and Communication
AAU


Abstract


Outline
Title: Afaan Orooo Genitive Constructions
1. Introduction
 1.1. Definition of Genitive Construction
 1.2. Statement of the Problem
 1.3. Research framework
 1.4. Objective of the article
2. Possessive Genitives
 2.1. Alienable Possessive Genitives
 2.2. Inalienable Possessive Genitives
 2.3. Possessive Genitives Plus Adjectives
 2.4. Possessive Genitives Plus these, that, articles
 2.5. Syntactic and Morphological Possessive Genitives
 
3. Descriptive Genitives
 3.1. Introduction
 3.2. Naming: Classifying Descriptive Genitives
 3.2. Metaphorical Descriptive Genitives
 3.3. Generic Descriptive Genitives
 
In this paper, I describe Afaan Oromoo Genitive Construction. In Afaan Oromoo, genitive constructions are marked by lengthening a final vowel of a noun. 
A noun that got its vowel long is interpreted as the possessor a noun that precedes it. The interpretation of Afaan Oromoo genitive construction where 
two nouns are involved is straightforward; but, if more than two nouns are involved ambiguities arise. This means that if a genitive construction is 
formed by three nouns, the second noun can be interpreted either as possessor (concerning the preceding noun) or as the possessed noun (concerning the 
following noun). I hypothesize that a genitive construction that involves more than two nouns is a borrowed instance that lacks an established phrasal 
pattern. These ambiguities are the source of public arguments. In the first part of this paper, I shall discuss problem areas of the topic by citing 
examples from social media. Moreover, I shall discuss more complex examples of Afaan Oromoo genitive constructions by citing sample MA thesis titles. 
In the second part, I shall discuss literature reviews on Afaan Oromoo genitive construction. The third part proposes solutions and concludes the paper. 

There are  5 types of genitive construction. These are possessive, subjective, source, objective and descritptive 
(https://www.eltconcourse.com/training/inservice/lexicogrammar/genitive.html). 


Gebregziabher, K. (2012). The alienable-inalienable asymmetry: Evidence from Tigrinya. 
In Selected Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Conference on African Linguistics (pp. 161-182).

Genitive construction can be classified into two main categories; namely, possessive genitive and descriptive
genitive constructions. Possessive genitives are further classifed into two main categries; these are alienable possession (ALP)
and inalienable possession (IAP). ALP and IAP are mainly differentiated on the bases 
of their corresponding semantic relationships. IAP forms a fixed semantic relationship between the possessor and the 
possessee (Gebregziabher, 2012: 161). For example,

1a. gurra mucaa
    ear   child
    'a child's ear'
    
1b. abbaa  gurbaa
    father boy
    'a boy's father'
    
    
As different from IAP, ALP doesn't form a fixed semantic relationship between the possessor and the 
possessee. The semantic relationship between the possessor and the possessee depend on the context (Gebregziabher, 2012: 161). 
For example, 

2.  mana    barsiisaa
    house   teacher
   'a teacher's house'
    
As shown in (2), there is no fixed semantic relationship between 'house' and 'teacher' because 'a teacher's house'
can be interpreted as a house that a teacher bought, built, rented and so on. Some languages like Tigrinya make 
a grammatical distinction between inalienable and alienable posssesions (Gebregziabher, 2012: 161); while others like Afaan Oromoo
do not make a grammatical distiction between the two. 

1. Possessive
Possessive genitive can be expressed either morphologically or syntactically. For example, 
1a. mana Tolasaa
1b. Tolasaan mana qaba
2a. obboleessa Boontuu
2b. Boontuun obboleessa qabdi.
The above examples are possessive genitives. They are expressed morphologically and syntactically. 

2. Alienable genitive

Alienable genitive constructions are expressed sysntactically. These genitive constructions show possession. Possessive genitives are alienable genitives.

3. Inalienable genitive

Inlienable genitives are possessive cases which can be expressed morphologically. As compared to these genitives, an inalienable genitives cannot 
expresseed morphologically. For example,

3a. Gaaddiseen refeensa dheeraa qabdi.
3b. *rifeensa dheeraa Gaaddisee
4a. Waariyoon ilkaan kaarruu qaba
4b. *ilkaan kaarruu Waariyoo

4. The subjective genitive
The subjective genitive expresses about the nature of the subject of a sentence. It doesn’t refer to possession. The subjective genitive can be 
expressed morophologically as well as syntactically as shown below:

5a. Fayyisaan aare.
5b. aarii Fayyisaa
6a. Qananiisaan fiige
6b. fiigicha Qananiisaa
7a. Tolasaan mana ijaare.
7b. Mana ijaarsa Tolasaa
8a. Giiloon muka yaabe
8b. Muka yaabbii Giiloo


9a. Boontuun boqqolloo cabsite.
9b. Boqqolloo cabsaa Boontuu

5. Source/Origin
Source genitive refers to the origin of a noun. Source genitives can be expressed both morphologically as well as syntactically. 

7a. buna Wallaggaa
7b. Wallagga buna biqilcha
8a. murtee ummataa
8b. ummatni murtee murteessa.

6. Objective genitive
Ojejective genitive refers to the nature of the object of a sentence. This type of genive construction can be expressed morophologically as well as 
syntactically as shown below:

9a. Tulluun mana ijaare
9b. ijaarsa manaa
10a. Galgaloon boqqoloo cabse
10b. Cabsaa boqqolloo

5. The Descriptive genitive

Rosenbach, A. (2006). Descriptive genitives in English: a case study on constructional gradience. English Language & Linguistics, 10(1), 77-118.
 (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/english-language-and-linguistics/article/descriptive-genitives-in-english-a-case-study-on-constructional-gradience/7B0AD52F3E002B99300A2EE9E805577B)

1. how do descriptive genitives differ from possessive genitives?
2. Are descriptive genitives syntactic, morphological or compounds?
3. How do descriptive genitives differ from N + N sequences?

Possessive genetives expands nominals into noun phrases. Semantically, possessive genitives specify (in)definiteness and establish
reference within the NP. 
In Afaan Oromoo the head can be separately determined by definite article or by other reference tracking devices:
1a. -kitaaba Guyyoo
1b. -Kitaabicha Guyyoo  (*the Johon's book)

2a. -kitaaba namichaa 
2b. -kitaaba namichaa kana (*this the man's book)

Semantically, the possessor Guyyoo in (1a) functions like the definite article, specifying the referent of the NP. 
In this example Guyyoo specifiees whose book it is, namely Guyyoo's. From a cognitive-pragmatic and semantic point of view
the possessor can be viewed as an 'anchor' that narrows down the referent of the NP (Rosenbach, 2006:80). 

In Afaan Oromoo the possessor can be postmodified and can be headed by a final determiner (note that English possessor can be pre- as well as 
postmodified 
and can be headed by an initial determiner):
3a. kitaaba namicha guddaa [the big man]NP's book
3b. kitaaba namicha kaleessa argitee [the man you saw yesterday]NP's book

Genitive constructions in which the possessor functions as a determiner have NP status and they denote a specific
entity. In 'kitaaba namichaa' the noun 'kitaaba' is a specific book. 

In contrast the dependant in descriptive genitives is not an NP but usually a noun. 
4a. mana dhagaa
4b. *mana dhagichaa
4c. manicha dhagaa
In (4b) the definite article -icha- can only belong to the dependant 'dhagaa' and cannot belong the the head 'mana'. Semantically, (4b) is different 
from (4a). 
Therefore, the depandant is a nominal rather than a full NP in such cases can be seen from the ungrammaticality of 
(4b). This shows that the dependent cannot have a determiner of its own. In (4c) -icha belongs to the head 'mana'. That is to say, the final determiner 
goes with the head (and not
the dependent). Therefore descriptive genitives are themeselves not full NPs but nouns or nominals and, in contrast to
determine genitives, they denote properties and not specific entities. 

Semantically, the dependent in descriptive genitives contributes to the denotation of the head noun, not specifying
in (4a) whose house it is (as in a corresponding determiner genitive) but rather what type of house. As such, the 
the dependant has a classifiying function in such genitives. As a classifier, the dependent is not referential and
does not refer to a specific referent. Not that in 'mana dhagaa' reference is not made to specific stone 'dhagaa' 
but to stone 'dhagaa' in general. 

The semantic difference between determiner genitives and descriptive genitives as discussed above are reflected in 
different positions in Afaan Oromoo noun phrases. Word order in the noun phrase is iconically determined in that any element contributing 
to the denotation of the head noun is positioned adjacent to the head, while anything contributing to the reference
of the noun phrase will be most distantly located away from the head noun (p,81). 

5a. hoolaa foonii
5b. *hoolaa foonichaa
5c. hoolaa namicha sanaa 
5d. hoolaa adii namicha sanaa
(5a) shows word order of descriptive genitives. As shown in (5b) descriptive genitives prohibit the expansion, prefer
the dependant to be adjacent to the head. (5c) shows determiner genitives which allows expansion of the noun phrase.
In (5c) the determiner -icha and the 'sana' are added to the noun 'nama' which specifies sheep 'hoolaa'. Further, 
the adjective 'adii' is inserted between the possessor and the head noun to expand the noun phrase to (5d) is determiner 
genitive construction.(p,82).

A descriptive genitive can be classifying, metaphorical, and generic one. It specifies another noun. 
6. Digrii Lammaffaa
7. Gulantaa lammaffaa
8. Itti aanaa Ministeeraa


ARE DESCRIPTIVE GENITIVES SYNTACTIC PHRASES OR COMPOUNDS?

(a) Coordination test

Rosenbach, A. (2006: 83) gives three criterion to test if descriptive possessors are syntactic or cmpound. 
First criterion is Coornation test. In Afaan Oromoo, coordination of dependant is common with descriptive genitives. 
9a. foon hoolaa
9b. foon reettii
9c. foon hoolaafi reettii
10a. mana dhagaa
10b. mana mukaa
10c. dhagaa manaa
10d. dhagaafi muka manaa
11a. reettii foonii
11b. hoolaa foonii
11c. reettiifi hoolaa foonii
12a. hoolaa hormaataa
12b. reetti hormaataa
12c. reettiifi hoolaa hormaataa


Because compounds do not allow a third element to be inserted between theme, these examples indicte taht descriptive genitives are syntactic phrases 
and not compounds. 

(b) Modification of the dependent

If an N + N construction is a compound, then it should not be possible to separtely modify the first noun. 

13a. foon hoolaa
13b. foon hoolichaa


In fact it should be noted that the dependent in descriptive genitives gives a different interpretation after modification.
In hoolaa'sheep' is not a determiner, it expresses a type, not specifying foon 'meat'. 

(c) Modification of the head

As Rosenbach, A. (2006: 85) says, the strongest test for phrasehood is the ability of a modifier to intervene between
the dependent and the head noun as shown below:
14a. foon hoolaa
14b. foonicha hoolaa
15a. boojjitoo marqaa
15b. boojjitoowwan marqaa

As shown above -icha and -oowwan are added to the head by intervening between the dependent and the head noun
to rule out compound status. 

HOW DO DESCRIPTIVE GENITIVES DIFFER FROM N + N SEQUENCES? (p, 89) (there is no N + N) in Afaan Oromoo

Descriptive genitives shown so far are known as classifying genitives. These genitives are said to be the prototypical cases 
Rosenbach, A. (2006: 91). 

3. TYPES OF DESCRIPTIVE GENITIVES

3.1. Classifying Genitives

Rosenbach, A. (2006: 92) argues there are three different functions of descriptive genitives: classifying, metaphorical and generic ones. 
Classifying genitives are the ones usually referred to in the literature as 'descriptive genitives' (p, 92). These genitives
are used to name certain objects and they can convey various degrees of lexicalization, from completely oqpaque expressions
to fully semantically transparent ones (p, 92). 
16a. ija bunaa
16b. gumaa garbuu
16c. arraba ibiddaa
16d. guyyaa dubartootaa, Seera Makkoo Billii, 
16e. harbuu Bantii
16f. buqqee seexanaa (sheexanaa)
(it includes, idiomatic expressions, plant names, insect names, named after person (p, 92). Product names, others
: girl's school, writers block, spider's web ...etc (p, 93)

In this naming function descriptive genitives are those that most clearly correspond to the term 'classifying genitives' as their basic
function is type restriction. However, thhis only holds for semantically endocentric cases, where the dependent 
clearly restricts the denotation of the head noun. In these cases the meaning of the head is the meaning of the 
whole genitive NP, i.e. St Valentine's day designates a certain day, women's undrwea a certain type of underwear
and smoker's cough a certain typeof cough, while a baby's head is not a type of head but a steak and kidney pudding.
Similarly in (33d) the meaning of the whole genitive construction is not deducible compositionally from the meaning of the 
head and the dependent attribute.. Rather, in these cases teh descriptive genitive refers to a complete mess (dog's breakfast) or to a specific type of balcony 
(widow's walks). While they are not as such transparent, knowledge of the etymology of these idiomatic expressions makes them fully
compositional in the figurative world, so to speak. For example, the term widow's walks (for porches on the roof)
goes back to the fact (or rather legend?) that the wives of seafarers used to to climb up there to watch out for the 
return of their husbands. Note, however, that even in the transparent cases (33e-g) the meaning of calassifying genives
is much more restrictive than in a corresponding determiner genitive. Electrician's tape, for example, describes a specific
type of tape, while a corresponding deterinmer genitive ([the elecrician's]tape) could mean various things: the 
tape the electrician possesses, uses, wants to have, dreams of, or whatever. It is in the nature of possession to allow
for all these meanings. As the function of the classifying genitives in (33) is to uniquely designate a specific object, it is 
clear that not all these possessive  meanings carry over and taht , so to speak, one possessive meaning gets 'frozen' in these cases. 
It is this 'freezing' of meaning which makes them so prone to undergo lexicalization and acquire lexeme  status. It is 
presumably for this reason that Huddleston & Pullum (2002: 470) regard this type fo genitive as 
'a somewhat unproductive category'. They note, for example, taht while we can have a summer's day and a winter's day,
a spring's day or an autumn's day are very questinable (they mark the latter two with a?). It is tru that the last two expressions are far less common than
the first two. (p, 93). 

Syntactic processes are by definition productive; it is usually only in the domain of word formation that the notion
of productivity is evoked at all. As argued above descriptive genitives (in the sense of the calassifying genitive discussed here0
can be syntactic phrases, and as such they should also be 'productive'. However, even when perceiving classifying genitives
as being formed by the rules of word fromation, productivity is usually defined as the ability of a form to coin new
expressions (p,94). That is, what matters is not how often a particular collection is used, but whether it is possible to coin
it in the first place. In the examples above, it is the actual frequency of use that makes the difference. Thus, notice
that both 'a spring's day and 'an autumn's day' can be used perfectly well to refer to a certain type of day; it is just
that for seme reason they don't happen to be particularly frequent ... p, 94. While frequency of use may give us an indication
as to the degree of lexicalization, it doesn't tell us anything about the productivity of the form/construction. 

Note that, in general, new classifying genitives can be easily formed on the spot wheneve we perceive something as defining a type.
Classifying genitives are fully productive (p, 94). 


3.2. Metaphorical genitives

Another type of descriptive genitives is used to describe an object, experience, state etc. in terms of another (p, 94). 
one. 

17. akka dhala sooressaa (meeshaa mi'aawaa bituu jaalata)
18. hamma baallee shimbirroo hin'ulfaatu
19. 

In (37a) the weight fo a swan's feather is used to describe the (light) weight of a person. In (37b) the well-known sound
of a a dentist's drill characterizes the (ghastly) sound of a person's voice. The strength/intensity of the wind 
is compared in (37c) to a prize fighter's blow. In (37d) the inner state of a person is described by means of the image
of a child's inflatable toy. Note that in this last example the whole context is already in the metaphorical world:
a word cannot lift a person literally. Rather, what is meant is that the word raises the person's spirits/mood, and 
the way to get this image to the reader is to stay in this 'lifting' - metaphor and compare it with an inflatable toy
(which can easily be lifted). The face in (37e) is compared to a child's pink ballon from which most of the air has escaped, 
i.e. this image reinforces the description of the face as puffed and crumpled, and the colour of the ballon (pink)
resembles the colour of the face. While in the examples in (37) the comparison is always made explicitly, most typically
by expressions such as as, like , it reminded x of (p, 95). 


In (38a) the person gives a yowl typical of cats. The person in (38b) does not of course literally have a puppy's 
eyelashes, but eyelashes that look like those of a puppy. And in (38c) the child described is not a tennis umpire. 
In fact, the whole setting is not a tennis setting, but it describes the settting of a play rehearsal by childeren,
with the 'stage director' being physically located above her caste. That is, she does not literally have a tennis umpires's 
advantage of height but only metaphorically -like a tennis umpire. (p, 95-96). 

Note also that these metaphorical genitives can often be found in ellipitical constructions (p,96).

In all these constructions the head of the genitive construction is omitted and refers back to a previously mentioned
noun. This indicates taht such metaphorical genitives are phrases and not words. In many cases it is not clear whether the 
initial article (usually the indefinet article) belongs to the dependent ofr to the whole genitive NP; however, examples (39a and c)
show that (at least in these case) the singualr articcle goes with the (singular) dependent and not whth the (plural) head. 
That is, structurally these genitives behave like determiner genitives. So, what -if anything - justifies their 
classification as descriptive genitives?

Note that in all the exampes avove the dependent is very clearly not specific. In fact, it cannot be, since the whole 
possessive NP is not specific -as said, it serves as teh vehicle to transport a certain image into the (specific) context.
Semantically, therefore, these construction are like descriptive genitives. They do not have the functin of a typical determiner, i.e. the referential
anchoring of a referent, since the whole possessive NP as such is not specific. Rather, they evoke a certain typicl property 
(hence, they are akin to what Strauss, 2004, calls 'propert-denoting possessives') (p, 96). 

Under this view, we may regard these metaphorical uses of genitives as a type of determiner genitive operation in a 'subordinate mental space',
facilitatin the identificaton of the referent of the (fictional) source domain. In this scenario we would first construe teh image
of a fictioanl referent, i.e. a puppy, and then connect it to its eyelashes.. In this case we might argue that within this 
fictional context, i.e. this subordinate mental space, a referent exists. That is, the dependent is specific in some irreal, 
fictious world, but clearly unspecific in the  'real' world of discourse. Alternatively, however, we may also view them as a special case of 
classifying genitive which is already akin to -but not identical with -determiner genitives. Under this view, then, 
the unspecific dependent would not help to identify a (fictional) referent but a property. In this scenario, we construe
eyelashes that are typical of puppies (in general), resulting in a nonsepecific interpretaion of the dependent. 
Emperically, it is very difficult to decide which of the two conceptualization routes language users take (and see also
section 4.1. on such constructional ambiguity). In any case, such metaphorical uses are very common. Not surprisngly, they are 
most often found in fictional texts, such as novels, where metaphor is a common device to get across certain imaginative
images or ideas. Metaphorical genitives are productive in the same way that determiner genitives ar, since they are modelled on them (p, 96-97)


3.3. Generic genitives

So far, we have only looked at the specificity of the dependent as a typical property distingushing determiner and 
descriptive genitives. Under this view, the depedent in a descriptive genitive is unspecific in its naming function and 
in tis comparing function, while it is specific in a determiner genitiv. However, specificity alone cannot account
for all the referential properties genitive-marked dependents can have in English (Afaan Oromoo???). In this section I argue that it is important 
to distinguis,, within the calass of nonspecific dependents, nonreferring dependents from referring (generic) dependents.

Nonspecificity and genericity are often treated alike, but they are different notions with different properties. While specificity
is a notion used to capture the referential properties of indefinite NPs, 'generic noun phrases are those in which 
reference is made to an entire class' (C.Lyons, 1999:179). While specificity is a term usually only applied to indefinet
NPs, generic NPs can also be expressed by definite NPs (The lion is a dangerous animal). Genericity is a concept that 
can apply to both sentences and NPs. On the NP level, generic NPs have been considered as 'kind-referring' NPs by Krifka et al. (19995), 
as opposed to 'object-referring' NPs, which denote a specific object/individual. A crucial difference between generic
and nonspecific entities then is taht generics refer (to kinds), while nongeneric, nonspecific NPs don not refer at all.

Now, how does all this relate to desriptive genitives? In (41) the dependent (a testator) is clearly not referring to 
a specific testator. However, it does refer, as is evident from the susequent anaphor his which refers back to the 
dependent(a testator). In contrast to determiner genitives this is not reference to a specific testator but referne to the 
kind 'testaror', i.e. the dependent is 'kind-referring', i.e. generic.

(41) Under family-provision legislation a testator's moral responsibility to provide for his dependents had become 
a legal obligation in 1938 (p, 98).

In contrast to metaphorical genitives, these genitives are not used to compare a referent in terms of another referent
(or the referent's properties) but to describe a specific referent by setting it in relation to its kind. Note again
that in the examples in (42) there is a specific refernt in the context that matches the generic possessor, a woman
in (42a) 'a thin woman's apology', and a man in (42b) 'a man's horrible, humiliting sobbing'. In all these cases the 
possessor abstracts away from the specific individuals, transcending them as examplars of a kind. Sometimes, this affinity
of a specific referent in the context to its kind is even makde explicit, in a kind of mocking way, as in (43), or 
or as describing the kind first and then finally identifying the matching (and co-present) referent, as in (44). 

(43). So. What you're about, MrC.Shepherd. You here as the hopeful answer to a maiden's prayers? ..,
(44) He was wanting a woman with a woman's way and a woman's knowledge, one who'd be as necessary to him as he was
her. And you're that kind of woman, Val. ...(p, 98).

There are other cases where the whole context is generic, and where therefore no potential specific referent is co-present
and hence no ambiguity between the modes of speaking arises; example (45a) a woman's fear of breats cancer, (45b)
a reader's respect, (45c) a woman's thought ... (p, 98).

In all these examples the genitive NP receives a generic interpretation via the overall generic 'scripts' or 'frames'
of the contexts ... That is, the overall context is generic and it is because of this overall generic setting that 
the genitive therein is generic, too. However, withn this generic context the abstract refernts get individualized. 

Note that we can also find generic dependents which are definite, while it was typical of the metaphorical genitives
discussed in in secion 3.2. to have indefinete dependents. In fact, teh definite singual is often regarded as teh 
prototypical generic expression ...

In the examples in (46), 'the bad child's impulse to cry, the oversleepers's panicked sense of having fallen behind, 
the optimistic Victorian's deep faith in progresss' ...the definite dependent is not specific but kind-referring;
example (47) 'And he could do noting about his complexion, swarthier than the average Englishman's' illustrates that
such generic definite dependents can also occur in ellipitic construction (p, 99). 

Like metaphorical genitives, generic genitives behave structurally like determiner genitives, but semantically like
descriptive genitives (with respect to their nonspecific dependent). Like metaphorical genitives, generic genitives are
as productive as determiner genitives, as every individualized referent can be conceived of as a representaitve of its kind.
(p,99). 


As shown in the above examples (11) describes second degree, (12)  grade and (13) position. 


Biiroo
Biiroo Misoomaa
Biiroo Misooma Qabeenyaa
Biiroo Misooma Qabeenya Bishaaniifi Inarjii Oromiyaa

Biiroo Barnootaa
Biiroo Barnoota Eegumsa Fayyaa
Biiroo Barnootaa Eegumsa Fayyaa Oromiyaa


Tafarii Baqqalaafi Waaqgaarii Dullumee “To’annaa Dambileefi Qajeelfamoota Bakka Bu’insaan Ba’anii: Haala Qabatamaa Oromiyaa” Joornaaliii Seeraa Oromiyaa (Jiil.8, Lak.1, 2011)
